📝 Fiscal Sponsorship Agreements [due Jan 17] (#219)
commonhaus/foundation: agreements/project-contribution/terms-and-conditions.md

**Source Code:**
Project code must be publicly accessible on any public code-hosting platform (like GitHub, GitLab, or BitBucket).

**Governance Structure:**
Project must have designated leaders, transparent practices, and a clear self-governance process.

**Community Engagement:**
The project must demonstrate a commitment to community engagement and inclusivity.

## Application Process

1. **Submission:**
Projects must submit an application via the Sponsor’s website.

2. **Review:**
The Sponsor’s Council will review the application for compliance with eligibility requirements.

3. **Approval:**
Upon initial approval, a discovery period will commence to assess and define the resources and boundaries of the project being transferred to the Sponsor.

## On-boarding

### Discovery Period

Upon initial approval, a discovery period will commence to identify and define the resources and boundaries of the project being transferred to the Sponsor.
This period involves:

- **Resource Assessment:**
    - Inventory of all tangible and intangible assets, including code repositories, documentation, trademarks, and domain names.

>     - Evaluation of current financial status and funding sources.

Author: I don't think so. They are included in financial status / funding sources, as that could be how you are paying for infrastructure (which is the case in at least one of our projects).

    - Identification of any outstanding liabilities or obligations.

- **Project Boundaries:**
    - Clear definition of the project’s scope, goals, and deliverables.
    - Definition of project governance and leadership structures.

The initial inventory of assets provided to the Sponsor is intended to provide a comprehensive list of resources necessary for the Project’s operations.
This inventory is subject to periodic review and amendment as new assets are acquired or developed by the Project.
Either the Sponsor or the Project may initiate updates to this inventory as needed, with all amendments documented in writing and appended to the original agreement.

### Agreement Execution

After the discovery period is complete and all details are thoroughly assessed and agreed upon, a [Fiscal Sponsorship Agreement][fs-landing] will be executed.

#### Transfer of Assets

> The transfer of assets associated with the Project may involve one or more [Asset Transfer Agreements][fs-landing], depending on the scope and nature of the resources being transferred.

Reviewer: Should a different link be used for "Asset Transfer Agreements"?

Author: No.. because the asset transfer agreements will be individualized docx/pdf. The README in this commit is what will be published as that landing page.

The only thing with a direct link is the Terms and Conditions, as that is the one thing that is common for all and will be published directly.

## Compliance and Governance

### Adherence to Policies

- **Code of Conduct:**
Projects must maintain their own Code of Conduct for project activities.
However, for all foundation-related activities, projects must adhere to the Sponsor’s [Code of Conduct][coc].

- **Foundation Policies:**
Projects must adhere to all Foundation Policies, including but not limited to these Terms, the [Trademark Policy][], and the [IP Policy][].

- **Open Source Software:**
Projects must use an open source license and ensure code is publicly available at all times.

### Required Project Files

Projects must provide and maintain the following documentation:

- **CODE\_OF\_CONDUCT.md:**
A document outlining the expected behavior and guidelines for project participants.

- **CONTRIBUTING.md:**
A document describing criteria for contributions as required by the [IP Policy][], versioning practices, and project build, test, and packaging instructions.

- **GOVERNANCE.md:**
A document describing project decision-making processes and contact information.

Further details and templates for these files can be found in [Sponsored project guidelines][].

### Communication

> Regular communication with the Sponsor regarding project activities and financial needs is required.

Reviewer 2: What does this mean? Are we going to be required to write quarterly board reports 😭

Author: I don't want to read quarterly board reports either. Are you participating in EGC discussions? Are you around on Discord where I can find you?

We should be working together to make sure domains are renewed and any other expenses get paid. What we don't want is ghosting.

Reviewer 3: Do we have to define "ghosting" in some way? What happens when project representatives can't/wont reply on time? We'd like to avoid a situation when CF must take action because the other side of the isle has been quiet for <insert a given period of time and/or attempts to communicate>.

Ghosting could be a symptom the project is in trouble. Ideally we'd react earlier to prevent/mitigate. But if it didn't happen for whatever reason, what happens next?

Do we spell these things out here?

Author: yes, we should. suggestions?

Author: I'll open a discussion for this part. The terms can be amended, so we'll chase this one separately.

Any discrepancies should be reported to the Sponsor within 30 days of receiving the report.

Projects are encouraged to keep their expense tracking up to date on the Open Collective platform for real-time transparency.

### Independent Financial Management

Individuals, companies, or groups may raise and manage funds independently in support of their contributions to the Project.
These funds are not part of the fiscal sponsorship arrangement and must remain separate from the Sponsor’s financial management systems.
Those managing independent funds are solely responsible for compliance with all relevant laws and regulations.

While alignment with the Sponsor’s policies is encouraged where possible, these independent activities must remain separate from the Project’s operations under fiscal sponsorship.

## Continuity and Leadership Responsibilities

Project leadership and operations naturally evolve due to changes in roles and responsibilities, or to unforeseen circumstances.

### Succession Planning and Leadership Transition

In this section, **“Successor”** refers to a qualified individual who assumes the role of Project Leader or Maintainer.

> As specified in the [Fiscal Sponsorship Agreement][fs-landing], a Successor must agree to the terms of that Agreement and become a Signatory.

Reviewer: Should this refer to "Future Project Leader" instead of "Successor"?

To me it's confusing to use the term "Successor", which in the Fiscal Sponsorship Agreement refers to non-profits that may take over a project.

As this is talking about replacing a project leader, or the like, as defined in Recitals of the FSA, it should be clear they're separate

Author: Let me try that. I agree on reuse of Successor (which is why I redefined it here), but I also think the meaning of the word (the leader that will take your place when you leave), is useful here. Future project leader is kind of a mouthful to repeat throughout the section.

## Compliance and Governance

### Adherence to Policies

- **Code of Conduct:**
Projects must maintain their own Code of Conduct for project activities.
However, for all foundation-related activities, projects must adhere to the Sponsor’s [Code of Conduct][coc].

- **Foundation Policies:**
Projects must adhere to all Foundation Policies, including but not limited to these Terms, the [Trademark Policy][], and the [IP Policy][].

- **Open Source Software:**
Projects must use an open source license and ensure code is publicly available at all times.

### Required Project Files

Projects must provide and maintain the following documentation:

- **CODE\_OF\_CONDUCT.md:**
A document outlining the expected behavior and guidelines for project participants.

- **CONTRIBUTING.md:**
A document describing criteria for contributions as required by the [IP Policy][], versioning practices, and project build, test, and packaging instructions.

- **GOVERNANCE.md:**
A document describing project decision-making processes and contact information.

Further details and templates for these files can be found in [Sponsored project guidelines][].

### Communication

> Regular communication with the Sponsor regarding project activities and financial needs is required.

Author: ```suggestion
Project leaders must be easily reached and respond to communication from the Sponsor regarding project activities and financial needs.
```

> Project leaders must be easily reached and respond to communication from the Sponsor regarding project activities and financial needs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Project leaders must be easily reached and reasonably responsive to communication from the Sponsor regarding project activities and financial needs.
```

Author: "reasonably" doesn't add much here. Given all projects can nominate a second and additional operational contacts can be listed, I don't think it's necessary.

Reviewer 4: I ... disagree. "Must respond" and "must be reasonably responsive" aren't the same thing.

Author: But, as the sponsor, I do need a response. It can't be silence.

Author: Ok. Compromise: 

> Signatories must be easily reached and reasonably responsive to communication from the Sponsor regarding project activities and financial needs.
> Projects should maintain multiple contacts (such as secondary EGC representatives or operational leads) to ensure reliable communication.

#### Use of Funds

Projects must use Sponsor-managed funds received for stated activities only and maintain a public and transparent ledger for the disbursement of those funds, as described in the [Fiscal Sponsorship Agreement][fs-landing].

#### Administrative Fees

The Sponsor may debit administrative fees from the Project’s restricted fund as specified in the [Fiscal Sponsorship Agreement][fs-landing].
Details about fee structures and any adjustments are available upon request.

#### Platform

The Sponsor currently uses the Open Collective platform (the “Platform”) to manage restricted funds for hosted projects.
Upon execution of the Fiscal Sponsorship Agreement, a new Collective (or a Collective Project) will be created for the restricted fund.

The Sponsor may switch to another platform with similar capabilities if necessary, with advance notice to the Project.

#### Expenses and Disbursements

Projects must submit expense reports (with receipts and documentation) through the Platform.

> All expenses must be approved by the Sponsor to ensure they are valid and in alignment with the Sponsor's tax-exempt purposes under the terms of this agreement before disbursement.

Reviewer 5: At the moment, OC hosted collective administrators can approve their own expenses. We should probably need to add some language saying something like "Hosted collectives admins must refrain from approving their own expenses when submitting them via the platform."

Author: Or we state that approved expenses are subject to Sponsor review/oversight?

Author: suggest?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All expenses must be approved by the Sponsor to ensure they are valid and in alignment with the Sponsor's tax-exempt purposes under the terms of this agreement before disbursement. Project restricted funds hosted at the OpenCollective, expenses can be approved by Project Leaders but the Sponsor reserves the right to deny expenses not in alignment with the Sponsor's tax-exempt purposes under the terms of this agreement post disbursement.
```

Author: This was helpful, Ken!

I chewed on it for a bit, and looked back at some others, and have suggested something else. 

@kenfinnigan and @cealsair ... have a look @ new section.

> Upon approval by the Sponsor, the Sponsor will reimburse those expenses (from the Project's restricted fund) through the Platform using a mutually agreed payment option.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Upon approval by the Sponsor, the Sponsor will reimburse those expenses (from the Project's restricted fund) minus Administrative Fees, through the Platform using a mutually agreed payment option.
```

### Succession Planning and Leadership Transition

In this section, **“Successor”** refers to a qualified individual who assumes the role of Project Leader or Maintainer.
As specified in the [Fiscal Sponsorship Agreement][fs-landing], a Successor must agree to the terms of that Agreement and become a Signatory.

**Effort to Identify Successors:**
Projects should establish and maintain a continuity plan that includes making a good faith effort to identify and prepare qualified Successors.

**Resignation of Signatories:**
Signatories may resign by providing written notice to the Sponsor.
Resignation removes the Signatory from the agreement, but does not terminate the agreement or alter the Sponsor’s ownership of the Project and its assets.

If a Project has only one Signatory and they wish to resign without a designated Successor, they must take all reasonable steps to enable the Sponsor to assume operational responsibility.
This includes:

- Documenting critical processes and procedures.
- Transferring access to all relevant accounts, tools, and resources.

> - Replacing any personal or employer-provided resources with Sponsor-accessible alternatives.

Reviewer 5: Should something about "transferring project-restricted funds to Sponsor" be included in this list?

Author: This is the succession/transition bucket (project leadership changes after agreements have been signed). All project-specific restricted funds are already managed by us.
